Ancient Faith Radio presents Homilies from All Saints, taken from the weekly sermons by Father Patrick Henry Reardon, priest at All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago, and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
Here's Father Pat.
In the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.
This feast day
My brothers and sisters is always more than one day in the Orthodox Church.
It begins on the Sunday prior to the fees of the exhortation of the Holy Cross, which itself is sometimes on a Sunday.
So this fees taken last two weeks.
It was introduced this past Sunday by reading from the last chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians.
In case you don't have the instant recall on that, and especially since the translation that was read was terrible, read it again.
I'm presuming that that translation was authorized by the Archdiocese.
I'm just presuming that.
But it was spentful.
It reads, Brethren, see with what large letters I am writing you in my own hand.
What's he talking about there?
Well, we know already waiting at Second Thessalonians that people writing letters as though they were coming from Paul and they'd show up.
And Paul had become aware of this.
So he started autographing the closing verses of each of his letters.
He starts that with Second Thessalonians, I believe.
So pretty early.
That's what's happening here.
At this point, he takes the pen away from the one who's taking the dictation.
And he starts to write himself, and he's writing the large letters, whole
Studies have been done on Paul's eyesight, by the way.
I don't think that's the thorn in the flesh.
I don't think it is.
I think it's something more serious than that.
But I've heard that thesis.
See with what large letters I'm writing with my own hand, it does appear that Paul's eyesight was not all that great, which might have been one of the ways in which he achieved more of the cross.
It is those who want to make a good showing in the flesh
that compelled you to be circumcised, only in order that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.
There's a lot to be said about that, but I'm not going to say it tonight.
I just want to simply insist that the people with whom Paul's arguing have already dismissed the cross.
They've dismissed the cross.
They've got a new gospel.
Paul says that early Englishians, you've got a new gospel.
It's a gospel without the cross.
It's a very modern gospel if you think about it.
If you read what's going on in the church today, almost no references to the cross at all, almost none, almost none.
We're talking about all kinds of things or problems the church is dealing with.
References to the cross are almost not existent.
in contemporary Paulans among Christians, especially in the Orthodox Church, especially.
I look at the fights among our bishops, for example.
It sounds just like the arguments for the Last Supper who's going to get the first place.
You think by now, well, never mind.
But anyway, the opponents of Paul, of those he calls the outside agitators,
the best way I can get from the outside agitators.
They've dismissed the cross.
They're trying to find some valuable salvation in some of the way besides the cross.
But for be it from me, he says, to glory, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world has been crucified to me and I to the world.
That's how he sees his ministry.
It's a participation in the crucifixion of Christ.
Then he goes on as Father Andrew remarked in passing this past Sunday in Sermon.
It was just one of the many wonderful things he said.
He refers to the marks of Christ's passion in his own body.
I remember how many times he had been beaten.
He'd been stoned three times up to this point.
Henceforth, let no one trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of Jesus."
Paul preaches the cross because he is a man of the cross.
And to my own shame, I can't make that boast.
I'm not a man of the cross.
I've made so many decisions in my life and so
done so many things in my life that were not informed by the cross of Christ.
When Paul wrote this letter to the Galatians, the churches of Galatia were about five years old.
You put the minister to Galatia in the year 48, you put the pistol to the Galatians about the year 53, it's about five years old.
But they had already lost the centrality
and the force of the cross.
They've become Christians.
They had morally improved.
They were better perhaps than the people with whom they lived, just the other citizens of Malaysia.
But they were quickly deceived as soon as someone shows up with another gospel besides that that Paul preached.
And tonight we had the first epistle of the Corinthians.
The same has to be said about the Church of Corinth, as you heard tonight.
And tonight's epistle.
The Church of Corinth was about six years old, perhaps seven, I think six years old.
But they'd already dismissed the cross from their thinking.
So Paul had to write them two letters.
We read some of the first letter tonight.
That tremendous panagyric on the cross, the cross is the power of God, crosses the wisdom of God.
Christians, they believe that Jesus is God's eternal word, therefore the source of our wisdom.
They thought of themselves as Christians, therefore the objects of God's love.
But in the concrete decisions they were making in their lives, the cross played no part at all.
They're fighting with one another, contending with one another, trying to be wiser and more powerful than one another.
And Paul reminds them tonight, the Corinthians, he reminds them tonight,
that God has chose what is weak and poor and powerless in order to put to shame that which is wise and powerful.
Much the same is true of the Church of Philippi.
The Church of Philippi doesn't seem to have the problems of the Galatians or the Corinthians.
What's going on in Philippi?
As far as we can tell, the problem in Philippi is two ladies are fighting in the congregation.
at the beginning of chapter four, I entreat Ivoria and Syndicate to stop bickering.
He names them.
We know their names.
That Paul has to, he's in prison and he has to write a letter to Philippi because there are two ladies fighting there.
And it's in that letter that he quotes the hymn in chapter two.
Froniti, let this mind, Froniti, let this fronima of Christ,
This is mindset, being you, which is also in Christ Jesus.
And he goes on to quote this him, who being in the form of God, thought not equality of God, a thing to be seized, but emptied himself and took a bomb in the front form of a slave.
That's what Christians are supposed to do.
In the Gospels, there's a primacy given to the passion of Christ.
In fact, someone remarked well over 100 years ago,
that the gospels are really stories of the passion with preambles.
That's especially true of the gospel of Mark, I suppose.
You know, the first half of Mark's gospel, which ends in Peter's confession of him in chapter eight of the Son of God.
But right away you go right into the prophecies, the first three of the pre-proposies of the passion.
I'm going to read you some lines that appear almost word for word, almost in Mark 8, Matthew 16, and Luke 9.
You will recognize this.
Then he said to them all, if anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
That's the way it reads in Mark 8 and in Matthew 16.
For whoever desires to save his life will lose it.
But whoever loses his life for my sake will save it.
Now, it reads exactly the same way in Luke 9, except with the addition of two words in Greek.
One word in English, but two words in Greek.
Here's the way it reads in Luke.
If anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross, kath himeron.
And follow me.
And take up his cross, kath himeron.
Himera is day, isn't it?
Normal greeting, talimera.
One another Greek, talimera.
means day.
Kathimer means according to the day.
We translate that in English by an adverb daily.
Let him take up his cross daily and follow me.
That comes only in the gospel of Luke.
Why does Luke add that one word?
Well, two words in Greek.
I think it's from being a companion
of the sufferings and the ministry of St. Paul.
When Luke wrote this, Paul had already been beheaded.
Luke was with him, as far as we can tell, Luke was with him to the very end.
At least in the last epistle that Paul wrote, he says that Luke is with him.
Luke saw up close what it was like for a man to be totally dedicated to the cross to make all the daily decisions of his life on the basis of the cross and through the interpretive lens of the cross.
We began with the early part of First Corinthians tonight.
Toward the end of the first Corinthians, chapter 15, Paul says, Kathimeran, Apulthinesco.
Kathimeran.
Apulthinesco means I die.
I die every day.
I die daily.
Exactly as an expression you have in Luke.
I die every day.
In other words, beloved in the Lord, the cross has to be a matter of daily concern.
It's not something we think about once in a while.
It's an absolute and daily preoccupation.
There's a wonderful work that I was taught came from the first decade of the third century called the Apostolic Tradition.
traditionally ascribed to apologizes of Rome.
He talks about the daily piety of the Christians.
He talks about how each Christian stops at mid-morning, which caused the third hour, and remembers that it was at this hour that Christ was crucified.
It's one of the reasons for believing that it comes from Rome, by the way, because in the Gospel of Mark, the Roman Gospel, that is the hour of crucifixion, is mid-morning.
Now the Christian stops when the sun is at its zenith.
He prays again because it was at that hour when the sun is at its top.
The great darkness settles on the earth for the next three hours.
So when the sun is at its zenith, Christians stop and pray again.
What did they pray?
They remember the darkness that descended on Calvary and on the whole world.
At that hour the Christ hung upon the cross.
then mid-afternoon, what we would call the ninth hour, the time of the evening sacrifice in the temple.
We're according to all the Gospels, the Lamb of God, Brieforth, this nice breath.
So during the day, Christian piety traditionally is structured around remembering the cross of Christ.
Now why?
Why would we do that?
Because each of us, every day,
has to make decisions.
Each of us every day has to decide how we are going to react to things that are going on.
Something is going to happen.
Maybe you're lucky.
Maybe it won't.
But it's a very good chance that, you know, I'll bet some of you really had a hard time getting here tonight with the traffic.
I'll bet.
May I have a show of hands on that?
So you see, but that's pretty mild.
That's pretty mild.
Anytime I think I'm having a rough day, I just think of all those poor people who lost their families and their homes recently to mudslides and floods and volcanic eruptions and fires.
See, people suffer.
People suffer.
We make decisions.
make decisions in our homes, make decisions of how we're going to react to bad news, unfortunate news.
It's important that the cross be the lens through which we examine every question and regard every problem.
The cross is what gives godly shape to the Christian life.
Now the cross will vary in each person's life
In myriad ways, already by the time Luke wrote his gospel, Luke was very concerned that people were being Christians, trying to be Christians, without much regard to the cross.
That's why he slips in that expression, coffee, melon, every single day to ponder the cross.
In the early days of the church, there were a lot of martyrs.
Martin became much less likely after the edict of Milan at the beginning of the fourth century.
It's at that time that people decided to look for the cross, to seek the cross.
It has to be a Christian monasticism.
The world has entered the church, coming in great numbers.
Lots of people just fled into the desert
be Christians there.
I think that's called, well, it's some option.
It's some option.
We just call that the monastic option.
The monastic option.
I don't want to get in any trouble with anybody.
But you notice that after the state takes over the church, because that's what happened, the state took over the church.
After the state took over the church, that's when you start to get bishops being deposed, sent into exile.
I mean, it was five times Athanasius was exiled.
It was five times, you know, Athanasius.
Think of someone like St. John Chrysostom.
Died in exile.
After people start persecuting the church, the church starts to persecute Christians.
Father Hopkins used to make that point.
There are variations.
how the cross comes into our lives.
For some of us, it'll be the place where we work or the people with whom we work.
For others, it'll be something physical.
Think of how many Christians suffer from bad health.
I think a lot about, say, John of Cronchdot.
Toward the end of his life, he had long periods of very poor health.
He was not able to
What a frustrating thing that had to be for so active a priest to be suffering from poor health.
Poor health is one of the things that we can endure as a cross.
The variations of the cross are myriad.
When we leave here tonight, brethren, I hope it will be with an added resolve to place the cross in the center of our vision
to test every trial, answer every question, address every concern through the standard of the cross.
Did we take up the cross daily?
Why?
In order to follow Christ.
Amen.
Homilies from All Saints with Father Pat Reardon, pastor of All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
This has been a presentation of Ancient Faith Radio.